Welcome to Linfiniti QGIS Training Manual's documentation!
==========================================================

GIS is becoming an increasingly important tool in environmental management,
retail, military, police, tourism and many other spheres of our daily lives.
If you use a computer or a cell phone, you have probably already used a GIS
in some form without even realising it. Maybe it was a map on a web site,
Google Earth, an information booth or your cell phone telling you where you
are. Proprietary GIS software (software that cannot be freely shared or
modified) is available that will let you do everything we describe in these
worksheets and a lot more. However this software is usually very expensive or
otherwise limits your freedom to copy, share and modify the software. GIS
vendors sometimes make an exception for educational activities, providing
cheaper or free copies of their software. They do this knowing that if
teachers and learners get to know their software, they will be reluctant to
learn other packages. When learners leave school they will go into the
workplace and buy the commercial software, never knowing that there are free
alternatives that they could be using.

With Quantum GIS, we offer an alternative - software that is free of cost and
free in a social sense. You can make as many copies as you like. When learners
leave school one day they can use this software to build their skills, solve
problems at work and make the world a better place.

When you buy commercial software, you limit your options for the future. By
learning, using and sharing Free and Open Source Software, you are building
your own skills, freeing money to be spent on important things like food and
shelter and boosting your own economy.

We hope you enjoy using and learning QGIS in the spirit of Ubuntu!


Tim Sutton, May 2012

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :numbered:

   introduction/index
   basic_map/index
   vector_classification/index
   map_composer/index
   create_vector_data/index
   vector_analysis/index
   rasters/index
   complete_analysis/index
   qgis_plugins/index
   online_resources/index
   grass/index
   assessment/index
   postgres/index
   postgis/index

   answers/answers

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

