********************
A Brief Introduction
********************

Welcome to our course! Over the next three days, we'll be showing you how to
use QGIS easily and efficiently. If you're new to GIS, we'll tell you what you
need to get started. If you're an experienced user, you'll see how QGIS
fulfills all the functions you expect from a GIS program, and more!

Why QGIS?
=========

As information becomes increasingly spatially aware, there is no shortage of
tools able to fulfill some or all commonly used GIS functions. Why should
anyone be using QGIS over some other GIS software package?

Here are only some of the reasons:

- *It's free, as in lunch.* Installing and using the QGIS program costs you a
  grand total of zero money. No initial fee, no recurring fee, nothing.

- *It's free, as in liberty.* If you need extra functionality in QGIS, you
  can do more than just hope it will be included in the next release. You can
  sponsor the development of a feature, or add it yourself if you are
  familiar with programming. 

- *It's constantly developing.* Because anyone can add new features and improve
  on existing ones, QGIS never stagnates. The development of a new tool can
  happen as quickly as you need it to.

- *Extensive help and documentation is available.* If you're stuck with
  anything, you can turn to the extensive documentation, your fellow QGIS
  users, or even the developers.

.. todo:: Add more reasons.

Now that you know why you want to use QGIS, we can show you how.

Tiered course objectives
========================

This course caters to different user experience levels. Depending on which
category you consider yourself to be in, you can expect a different set of
course outcomes. Each category contains information that is essential for the
next one, so it's important to do all exercises that are at or below your level
of experience.

Beginner
--------

In this category, the course assumes that you have little or no prior
experience with theoretical GIS knowledge or the operation of a GIS program.

Limited theoretical background will be provided to explain the purpose of an
action you will be performing in the program, but the emphasis is on learning
by doing.

When you complete the course, you will have a better concept of the
possibilities of GIS, and how to harness their power via QGIS.

Intermediate
------------

In this category, it is assumed that you have extensive knowledge and
experience of the everyday uses of GIS.

Following the instructions for the beginner level will provide you with
familiar ground, as well as to make you aware of the cases where QGIS does
things slightly differently from other software you may be used to. You will
also learn how to use QGIS's advanced analysis functions and plugin framework.

When you complete the course, you should be comfortable with using QGIS for all
the functions you usually need from a GIS, as well as QGIS's more unique
features.

Advanced
--------

In this category, the assumption is that you are experienced with either QGIS
or another GIS software package, and have an interest and background in
programming and/or writing scripts for GIS analyses.

Following the instructions for the other two experience levels will give you
insight into the everyday user's experience in QGIS, and will ensure that
you're familiar with current developments in the latest release branch of QGIS.
You will also learn about plugin development for QGIS, and how to get started
if you want to get more involved in the QGIS project as a developer.

When you complete the course, you should be familiar with the operation of QGIS
from a user perspective, as well as understanding how to get started with
plugin development and further involvement in the project.


